A natural disaster can be classified as geological, hydrological, metrological, wildfires and space disasters. Among the geological disasters, earthquakes occur in almost all regions of the world, and mostly without any prior indication.
Among the hydrological disasters, floods occur in many parts of the world. However, many of the floods, including those as a result of landslides, are partially caused by humans.
Among the metrological disasters droughts and famines cause major life and economic losses. Wildfires, though, cause less death toll, but can be a threat to humans, property and wildlife. Common causes of wildfire include lightning and droughts. Further, hurricanes cause massive damages and may cause flood like situations.
Impact events and air bursts, and solar flares are two sub-categories of space disasters. Among these asteroids that impact the Earth have led to several major extinction events.
Some natural disasters like earthquakes are not predictable but use of appropriate building codes can help to reduce the damage. Several others are predictable well before so that safety measures can be taken well in time.
We propose a four-step solution to the problem of natural disaster prediction and prevention to reduce the damage. 
Step 1: Acquisition of pre-disaster data like Land Use, Land Cover, Transportation Infrastructure, Utility Infrastructure, Digital Elevation Models, Socioeconomic Characteristics, Meteorological Data, and Critical Environment Area Assessment of last 1-5 years can be used to assess the pre-emergency situation.
Step 2: Identification of the area which are vulnerable to natural disasters due to changing land-use, ecological changes, socio-economic developments, etc.  For this purpose temporal data are used, and change detection along with the ML model and the knowledge-based system can be used to assess an impact of a possible natural disaster.
Step 3: For assessing the pre-emergency situation, both, a Machine Learning Model and a Knowledge-based System can be developed and used. The causative factors and their impact can be estimated to an acceptable accuracy. Large amounts of data are not available for all areas to build a reasonably accurate ML model, hence, a knowledge-based system can represent the compiled knowledge derived from various sources like experts, scientists, environmentalists, journals, books, Internet etc.
Step 4: For the Disaster Emergency Response, a comparison is done with the pre-emergency data and post-emergency data. The post-emergency data can either be acquired or can be estimated using secondary sources of data with respect to damaged housing stock, damaged transportation, damaged utilities and hindered services along with an estimate (using the ML model and the knowledge-based system) of the extent of the effect of the disaster. In areas with steep slope Digital Elevation Model (DEM) is used and other thematic and land-use layers are overlaid on it.
We propose to develop a prototype for predicting rainfall, causal effects of rainfall, simulation of flood and its impact using acquired/simulated data, DEM, ML model and knowledge-based system.
We plan to implement this using F# and if necessary for faster performance, some low level implementation may be done using C# or C++.
